FEATURE |  HBCU LEADERSHIP

Lightning in a Bottle

How H.E.L.F. Built the HBCU Leadership Pipeline That No One Else Would

A decade ago, four people sat in a small hotel suite in New Orleans with no name, no logo, and no guarantee that anyone would come back. What they built has quietly transformed who leads America’s historically Black colleges and universities.

By Jamal Watson

The storm that rolled into New Orleans on the day the Higher Education Leadership Foundation held its very first gathering was fitting, if unintentional. Dr. Herman J. Felton Jr., president and CEO of Wiley University, then newly arrived in the presidency and brimming with restless energy about what HBCU leaders needed and weren’t getting, had helped convene a group of like-minded colleagues at the Le Méridien Hotel. They had invited three guests: Walter Kimbrough, then a sitting HBCU president; Dr. Elfred Anthony Pinkard, past president of Wilberforce University and now President in Residence at UNCF; and Tony Clayton, chair of the Southern University System. They had a room reserved. They had chairs set up.

What they did not have was certainty that anyone would show up.

“We had about 20 people who said they would come,” Felton recalled, “and me and Melva said, you know what, we’re going to do it, and whoever comes, come.” In the end, a small group arrived. The conversation, though, was electric. Three questions anchored the discussion: What was it like to navigate board leadership? What did it mean to be a second-in-command — the provost, the vice president, the person behind the curtain holding an institution together? And what did it actually take to ascend to the presidency?

Those questions, modest as they seemed, were the seeds of something that would grow, over the next decade, into one of the most consequential leadership development movements in American higher education.

H.E.L.F. — the Higher Education Leadership Foundation — is celebrating its tenth anniversary this year, and if you work at or around a historically Black college or university, you have almost certainly felt its presence, even if you don’t know it by name. More than 500 fellows have passed through its leadership institutes. At least 15 of those fellows have gone on to become HBCU presidents. Scores of others have moved into cabinet-level roles, started companies, launched programs, and hired one another. There is a GroupMe chat, Felton noted with obvious delight, with more than 500 names in it.

<w:bottom w:val="single" w:sz="8" w:space="4" w:color="C8A45E"/></w:pBdr><w:spacing w:before="360" w:after="360"/><w:ind w:left="720" w:right="720"/><w:jc w:val="center"/></w:pPr><w:r><w:rPr><w:i/><w:iCs/><w:color w:val="1A1A2E"/><w:sz w:val="30"/><w:szCs w:val="30"/></w:rPr><w:t>“We just knew that there was something — there was a void. And we couldn’t codify it. We initially thought we needed a gathering space for like-minded individuals who want to serve at HBCUs. That was it. That was really it.” — Dr. Herman J. Felton Jr., President &amp; CEO, Wiley University

A MOVEMENT WITHOUT A MEMO

Ask H.E.L.F.’s founders what they were trying to build in those early years and you will get the same answer, delivered with equal parts laughter and sincerity: they had no idea.

“We just knew that there was something — there was a void,” Felton said. “And we couldn’t codify it.” There was no strategic plan, no theory of change, no logic model. What there was, instead, was a conviction — shared by Felton; Dr. Melva K. Wallace, president and CEO of Huston-Tillotson University; Dr. Elfred Anthony Pinkard; and Gregory D. Deas, the marketing guru who was instrumental in all things digital — that the people who loved HBCUs enough to dedicate their careers to them deserved a space of their own.

The early years were exercises in faith. After New Orleans, the group reconvened at National Harbor, Maryland. George French, whom Felton and Wallace knew personally — “We’d gone to school with him,” Felton noted — came to speak, and after that conversation, the co-founders looked at each other and said, as Felton put it, “We’re gonna go full throttle.”

Between New Orleans and National Harbor, they wrestled with the fundamentals: What would they call themselves? What would their colors be? How would they get recognized? What did they stand for? The lion in their logo — fierce, regal, deliberate — was no accident. “We knew that we wanted homage to our native land,” Felton said. “We knew that we wanted a fierce representation of that.”

The first Leadership Institute was held at Miles College, with George French’s blessing. They invited thirty people they knew personally. Twenty showed up. Nineteen of them came on scholarship. Only one paid. But in that room at Miles College, something crystallized. “We knew that we had captured lightning in a bottle,” Felton said. More than that, the mission came into sharp relief: H.E.L.F. would exist to strengthen the leadership pipeline for HBCUs. Not to manufacture presidents. Not to run a credential program. Not to replicate what anyone else was doing. To strengthen the pipeline. Period.

<w:bottom w:val="single" w:sz="8" w:space="4" w:color="C8A45E"/></w:pBdr><w:spacing w:before="360" w:after="360"/><w:ind w:left="720" w:right="720"/><w:jc w:val="center"/></w:pPr><w:r><w:rPr><w:i/><w:iCs/><w:color w:val="1A1A2E"/><w:sz w:val="30"/><w:szCs w:val="30"/></w:rPr><w:t xml:space="preserve">“We knew that we had captured lightning in a bottle — but more than that, the focus became very clear. It was pipeline building. Strengthening the leadership pipeline for HBCUs.”

THE H.E.L.F. MODEL: WHAT HAPPENS IN THE ROOM

The thing that sets H.E.L.F. apart from every other leadership development program in higher education — and there are more of them now than there were a decade ago, which Felton considers a sign of progress rather than competition — is not a curriculum. It is an orientation. An ethos. A deliberate refusal to operate the way leadership development programs typically operate.

Ask Dr. Pinkard, and he’ll frame it as something even more fundamental: a question about what becomes possible when the right people come together with genuine purpose. “A lot of it was both,” Pinkard said of how word about H.E.L.F. first spread. “I think it was organic. I think people began to see that there was this movement, or this organization that was being thoughtful and intentional in developing leaders who were principled and credentialed and well-informed. I think people resonated with that movement. It was like, oh, look at this. I want to be a part of this. I love HBCUs, and it’s exciting to see that there is something that exists that will be intentional about making sure that these institutions survive and thrive.”

When fellows arrive at a H.E.L.F. Leadership Institute, they come prepared, as Wallace put it, “to be the smartest person in the room, and ready to compete.” They have doctorates. They have MBAs. They have years of experience and publications and strategic plans. They arrive in full professional armor.

And then the armor comes off.

“We say, look — everybody got a doctorate or whatever, everybody’s got an MBA — simmer down,” Wallace said. “We’re not… this is not what this is about to be. Somebody in here is in housing, and somebody is a VP for Advancement, and everybody’s okay.” H.E.L.F. is explicitly not about functional expertise. The premise is that fellows already have that. What the institute focuses on instead is the personal pathway of the leadership journey — self-knowledge, emotional intelligence, followership, and the peculiar, particular demands of serving an HBCU.

The presenters who come to H.E.L.F. institutes are not keynote speakers delivering polished remarks. They are sitting presidents, vice presidents, and senior administrators who agree, before they ever step into the room, to be intimate about their work in ways they are rarely intimate anywhere else. They talk about the decisions that blew up. The crises they didn’t see coming. The things they would do differently. The moments when the weight of the crown became almost unbearable.

“People that are coming to present have agreed to share intimacy about their work that oftentimes they have not even shared on their own campus,” Wallace said. “So that intimacy — when you have presidents and VPs saying, look, I messed this up, and this was a hot mess expressed, and I got in trouble doing XYZ — you know, and it didn’t work out — like, wow, okay. I’m okay in this space.”

That safety — that sense of protected honesty — has become H.E.L.F.’s signature product, more valuable than any framework or competency model. Fellows consistently cite it as the thing that made the experience different from every other professional development experience they have had.

Wallace has been particularly focused on a quality that rarely gets discussed in leadership development circles: followership. The question H.E.L.F. presses fellows to answer is not only how to lead, but how to support someone else’s leadership — how to exercise a principled, selfless followership that strengthens institutions from within. “When you think about it, at its core, four of us got together with a single, simple idea of serving people we don’t even know,” Felton said. “Think about that.”

<w:bottom w:val="single" w:sz="8" w:space="4" w:color="C8A45E"/></w:pBdr><w:spacing w:before="360" w:after="360"/><w:ind w:left="720" w:right="720"/><w:jc w:val="center"/></w:pPr><w:r><w:rPr><w:i/><w:iCs/><w:color w:val="1A1A2E"/><w:sz w:val="30"/><w:szCs w:val="30"/></w:rPr><w:t xml:space="preserve">“People either leave there clear that they want to do the work — the presidency — or clear that they’re not going to do it. And we believe that leaders ascend to the presidency. If they want to. If they want to.”

DEMYSTIFYING THE PRESIDENCY

One of H.E.L.F.’s most counterintuitive contributions to the HBCU ecosystem has been its systematic effort to demystify the presidency — to strip away the mythology that has historically surrounded the role and replace it with something more honest, more human, and ultimately more useful to aspiring leaders.

For much of HBCU history, the presidency carried a kind of patriarchal sanctity. Presidents were figures of near-mythic stature — they did not do podcasts, did not admit failure, did not invite scrutiny of their decision-making. The president was the institution, and the institution was the president. The veil was kept firmly in place.

H.E.L.F. has worked to lift that veil, carefully and deliberately. “We demystify the presidency,” Felton explained, “not in a way that creates a deficiency for it, or a lack of respect. But getting people to understand that we are individuals who need other individuals to do the work with us, and the same challenges befall all of us.”

The effect on fellows has been profound, and not always in the direction one might expect. Some arrive at a H.E.L.F. institute certain they want to be a president, and leave equally certain they do not. Others arrive uncertain and leave clear. The institute is not a recruitment mechanism for the presidency. It is a truth-telling space about what the presidency actually demands.

“We need great deans of students,” Wallace said, pushing back against the notion that the only mark of HBCU leadership success is the president’s chair. “We need great deans, we need great VPs, we need phenomenal chairs. We need department heads that are solid.” The H.E.L.F. model insists that leadership blooms at every level of an institution, and that the work of developing leaders cannot be reduced to developing presidents. “We believe that leaders ascend to the presidency,” Felton added. “If they want to. If they want to.”

THE ECOSYSTEM EFFECT

Over seventeen institutes — conducted twice a year since 2015 — H.E.L.F. has produced something its founders did not entirely anticipate: a network so dense, so emotionally bonded, and so professionally active that it functions almost like a second institution layered across the HBCU landscape.

Fellows leave with more than notes and connections. They leave with what Felton called, borrowing a term with obvious affection, a kind of tribalism — a cohort identity that persists long after the institute ends. Cohorts name themselves. They create line names. They establish GroupMe threads that remain active years later. They take vacations together, write grants together, start ventures together. “Each of our cohorts really resemble Greek life,” Felton observed. “They come away with the cohort name — that we don’t even tell them to do. The first day they establish GroupMe chats.” The current GroupMe has more than 500 members spanning all seventeen institutes — a living, breathing network of HBCU professionals who know each other not just by title but by experience.

Erin Lynch, a H.E.L.F. fellow and researcher who has been commissioned to conduct a formal impact assessment of the organization’s first decade, captures the organic quality of these bonds. Lynch has described how her closest professional friendships emerged from her cohort — friendships that have translated into real collaborative work, co-authored grants, and institutional partnerships. “She would say, hey, oh my gosh, my best girlfriends came out of that cohort,” Felton recounted. “We traveled together, we’re on vacation together.”

Deas, whose design and digital vision helped give H.E.L.F. its identity from the beginning, sees that connective tissue as the organization’s most durable achievement. “There is something to be said about the network,” Deas reflected. “Individuals who might be in the space, you know, might be going through something — and you knowing that this stranger from 100 miles away at another institution is having the same experience. That builds a connection between the two. And you feel like you’re not alone in it. I like to think that H.E.L.F. — we deal in the emotional, or the intrinsic. We make space for that. I think that people in this space really have, and have to have, an emotional connection to the work that they’re doing in order for it to really be worth doing, and to do it at the highest capacity.”

“I know that the network has saved some institutions,” Felton said, with characteristic directness. “I know folks that have been in some tough situations — and it’s like, okay, we give the look, like, we gotta make this work. Connecting with — being safe to call somebody else and say, ‘Hey! This is not working out. What’s going on? And before I mess this up.’ I think the network has been transformational for me.”

TEN YEARS ON: THE LANDSCAPE HAS CHANGED

When H.E.L.F. held its first gathering in New Orleans, the landscape of HBCU leadership development was, to put it plainly, sparse. The conventional wisdom — implicit if not always stated — was that HBCUs lacked the capacity to develop their own leaders, that the institutions and communities that understood the HBCU mission most deeply were not the ones positioned to cultivate the next generation of executives to lead them.

In the decade since, that narrative has been challenged and, in many respects, overturned. Virginia Union University launched the Center for the Study of HBCUs. Clark Atlanta University’s Executive Leadership Institute has built a dedicated pipeline for HBCU presidents. Lincoln, Voorhees, and North Carolina A&amp;T have developed their own leadership programs. Howard University’s Center for Leadership and Policy is less than a decade old. The landscape now includes what it barely gestured at before: a robust internal infrastructure for developing HBCU leaders, built and led by people who have lived the HBCU experience.

“We’ve checked the box as a collective,” Felton said, “to talk about reframing that narrative that we aren’t good enough to tell our own story, or we are no longer doing that.” H.E.L.F. does not claim sole credit for this transformation — it is too intellectually honest an organization for that. But it was, by any accounting, among the first, and among the most persistent.

The work continues to expand. H.E.L.F.’s Ideation, Innovation, and Collaboration convening series — which brought together approximately seventy presidents, scholars, search firm partners, and trustees at Claflin University last year — represents a natural evolution of the organization’s mission from pipeline-building into ecosystem-strengthening. The next convening, planned for Virginia State University this May, will bring together presidents, board members, governance scholars, and search professionals to grapple with three questions: What constitutes effective presidential leadership? What constitutes effective board governance? And what does great synergy between boards and presidents actually look like?

“You don’t know this,” Felton told me near the end of our conversation, “but we have concluded that you are the perfect person to do an opening panel.” The panel, he explained, would frame the convening around a central argument: that none of us — not administrators, not journalists, not scholars, not trustees — are absolved from solving the leadership conundrum facing HBCUs right now. It is a characteristically H.E.L.F. formulation: inclusive, demanding, and bracingly honest about where the responsibility lies.

FOR THE CULTURE: A NEW CHAPTER

In the tradition of George Curry’s Emerge magazine—that landmark publication that gave Black America an intellectual and political home before its untimely end — H.E.L.F has launched a new platform called The H.E.L.F Review.  This new publishing and content venture was developed to provide what Felton and his colleagues describe as an unfettered space for Black administrators, faculty, and leaders in higher education to write, argue, reflect, and tell their own stories without having to translate themselves for an outside audience.

The impulse is about authenticity above all else—a place where people can lean in, feel comfortable not having to conform their thoughts and ideas, and find in the written word the same recognition that H.E.L.F.’s leadership institutes have generated in person for a decade.

It is, in essence, the same impulse that drove H.E.L.F. from the beginning: the conviction that the people who love HBCUs most should also be the ones building the infrastructure through which HBCUs are understood, led, and sustained.

In a small hotel suite in New Orleans, a decade ago, that conviction sparked something. The storm outside that day has long since passed. What it lit has not.

Dr. Jamal Watson is the editor of The H.E.L.F Review.